---
title: "Ontology and Semantics of Reductions of Arithmetic"
date: 2023-05-14
sequence: college
---

*Originally written for PHIL 1675 Set Theory, Spring 2023 with Prof. Eric Guindon.*

If axiomatic set theory is supposed to be a foundation for all of
mathematics, as it is often treated in mathematical practice, then there
cannot be *sui generis* mathematical objects other than sets. That is,
natural numbers must in fact be sets. The ontological identification of
numbers with sets, or in other words the reduction of arithmetic to set
theory, was challenged by Paul Benacerraf in his seminal 1965 paper
“What Numbers Could Not Be.” Benacerraf’s objection, built principally
on the idea that the existence of multiple possible reductions defeats
all of them, has been widely considered to deal a fatal blow to the
reductionist project and definitively demonstrate that numbers are not
sets. Alexander Paseau’s 2019 chapter “Reducing Arithmetic to Set
Theory” is one attempt to “overturn this orthodoxy” (Paseau 35) and
vindicate reductionism from Benacerraf’s objection. Here, I will outline
Benacerraf’s argument and Paseau’s response, and ultimately conclude
that the original objection retains its force.

Grounding the full practice of mathematics in an axiomatic set theory
such as Zermelo-Fraenkel set theory with Choice (ZFC) is clearly
appealing. With a set theoretic foundation, mathematics is clean and
economical, conservative in its commitments both in terms of axioms and
objects. If there are to be no other mathematical objects other than
sets, however, then one must provide an account of the other objects
that seem to exist, such as the natural numbers. The question “what are
numbers, really?” demands an answer, and in the reductionist paradigm
just described the answer must be that they are some kind of set.
Concretely, any particular number must be some particular set. There
must be some set *S* such that 3 = *S* is true, and likewise for each
other natural number.

Which sets are they? Any answer must be able to exhaustively account for
all the arithmetic properties of numbers. That is, the answer must
reduce all numbers, arithmetic operations, and numerical facts to
statements about sets. One answer (the most popular one in mathematical
practice) comes from the von Neumann ordinals: 0 is identified with ∅,
the successor of a natural number *n* is identified with the set *n* ∪
{*n*}, the ordering relation &lt; is identified with the subset relation
⊂, and some set *S* has cardinality equal to the number *n* just in case
it can be put into bijection with the set *n*. In this way, every
statement made in the language of (Peano) arithmetic can be translated
into a set theoretic statement. Moreover, on the view generated by this
von Neumann reduction, there is nothing to such arithmetical talk but
its set theoretic translation as just given. The referent of the numeral
3 *is* the set {∅, {∅}, {∅, {∅}}}. This would be sufficient to reduce
arithmetic to set theory. Such a reduction demands no changes in the
language or practice of mathematics, it merely means that when
mathematicians talk of numbers and arithmetic they are employing
shorthands and nicknames, and that the true subjects of their discourse
are sets.

However, the reduction given above is not the only one possible. Another
way of translating arithmetic-talk into set-talk is via the Zermelo
ordinals. On this picture, 0 is ∅ and successor of *n* is {*n*}. The
&lt; relation and the cardinality properties are less immediate, but on
this reduction, too, they can be translated into set-talk. For example,
we can recursively define the ordering relation by saying that, *m* &lt;
*n<sup>+</sup>* (that is, *m* is less than the successor of *n*) just in
case *m = n* or *m &lt; n*. This picture, too, provides a complete
reduction of all the arithmetic properties of the natural numbers to
sets.

The natural numbers cannot simultaneously be reduced to the von Neumann
ordinals and the Zermelo ordinals. If the numeral 3 denotes the set {∅,
{∅}, {∅, {∅}}}, then it cannot also denote the non-identical set
{{{∅}}}. The two reductions make claims that straightforwardly
contradict: a von Neumann reductionist is committed to the claim that 2
is an element of 4, whereas a Zermelo reductionist is committed to this
claim’s negation. The foregoing demonstrates that there are at least two
candidate reductions of arithmetic to set theory, and that at most one
of them can be correct. If no reduction is true, then reductionism
itself is false, numbers are not sets after all, and our original goal
of grounding arithmetic in set theory has been foiled. Thus, if
reductionism is to be saved, it must commit itself to a particular
reduction among the candidates.

For Benacerraf, such a choice of reduction must be non-arbitrary. “If
the numbers constitute one particular set of sets, and not another,”
Benacerraf says, “then there must be arguments to indicate which”
(Benacerraf 58.) Benacerraf does not give a positive reason to think
that no such argument is possible, but there don’t seem to be many
possibilities for where to locate one. The linguistic practice of number
words does not seem to decide the question, and mathematical practice
seems to be of little help, too. Arguments about the ease of use for one
reduction over another seem to be mere “stylistic preferences”
(Benacerraf 62) that only have to do with which sets are in some way
nicer, not which choice is more likely to actually be correct. Not only
that, but many mathematicians take themselves to be working with *sui
generis* (that is, irreducible) numbers when doing arithmetic, so simple
deference to the experts does not seem available either. We have
multiple candidate reductions that all perfectly fit the bill, and no
principled way to decide among them. The issue can also be framed
epistemically. If one particular reduction is correct, then in order for
the true set-identity of numbers to be epistemically accessible there
must be some way to come to know the truth of the one true reduction
over all other candidates. That is, “if the number 3 is really one set
rather than another, it must be possible to give some cogent reason for
thinking so; for the position that this is an unknowable truth is hardly
tenable” (Benacerraf 62.) Since no such cogent reason seems to exist,
Benacerraf concludes the matter against reductionism.

Paseau hopes to save reductionism by countering Benacerraf’s demand for
non-arbitrariness. For Paseau, “ it is more rational to make an
arbitrary selection between two equally good set-theoretic objectual
semantics than to refuse to reduce arithmetic to set theory” (Paseau
38.) He presents two metaphors that help develop this view. First, he
calls on Buridan’s ass, a thought experiment originally critiquing the
positions of 14th-century French philosopher Jean Buridan, in which a
donkey that is equally hungry and thirsty is placed in the middle of a
bale of hay and a bucket of water, equidistant from each. With no reason
to prefer the food over the drink or vice versa, the donkey becomes
hungrier and thirstier in exactly equal amounts until it dies of
malnutrition. For Paseau, the non-arbitrariness concern over multiple
reducibility is analogous. There are multiple good candidates for
reductions of arithmetic to set theory. Abandoning the project of
reduction just because there is no principled way to decide between them
would be like dying like Buridan’s ass.

To be clear, Paseau does not take himself to be performing a reduction
aimed at “meaning analysis” meant to “reveal what number-talk meant all
along” (Paseau 37.) Instead, he takes his reduction as an “explication”
of numbers where one’s own future number-talk is meant to stand for
set-talk. This distinction is somewhat unclear, since Paseau does go on
to use this explication to reinterpret essentially all number-talk,
including that of mathematicians predating the choice of reduction.
Regardless, Paseau seems to take the issue as essentially a semantic
one.

To illustrate further, let us turn to his second metaphor, that of the
identical twins. Paseau writes: “suppose a mother of identical twin
girls is delivered of them at exactly the same moment. She had long ago
settled on ‘Olympia’ for her first-born girl’s name and ‘Theodora’ for
the secondborn; but as they were born simultaneously, she is in a
pickle. What to do? An arbitrary choice is called for: say, name the
baby on the left ‘Olympia’ and the one on the right ‘Theodora’” (Paseau
38.) To Paseau, the situation of arithmetic reduction is similar: the
choice is akin to a naming, the issue is fundamentally semantic rather
than ontological in character. If someone were to press hard on the name
assignments, asking “which twin is Olympia *really*?” (Paseau 49)
because of the arbitrariness of the naming decision, not only would
there be no good story to respond with, but their question would border
on the meaningless.

Paseau’s solution to the problem of multiple reducibility is thus to
embrace the arbitrariness. We should simply pick a preferred reduction,
decide that our future number-talk is in fact a nickname for the sets
involved in that reduction, and when it comes to another speaker of
number-talk, trade on her intention to “ mean by her number words what
others, myself included, mean by them, and her wish for her arithmetic
discourse to be interpreted as true” (Paseau 42) in order to also
interpret her using the reduction. In this way, the explication reduces
all “normal” number-talk to set-talk, and if there are speakers who
hard-headedly mean *sui generis* numbers to be the referents of their
talk, we adopt for them an error theory in which all they say is simply
false because there exist no *sui generis* numbers to make it true. If
there are reductionists around of a different stripe, and there are so
many of them that “pressures of uniformity are sufficiently felt”
(Paseau 44), then we are to reconcile with them perhaps by coordinating
a shared semantics, or perhaps by deferring to them and changing our
reduction to theirs. The idea is that mathematicians speak number-talk
without strong ontological commitments, rather primarily with the
intention of simply performing mathematics. Thus, we have the leeway to
reinterpret them in light of our reduction.

Whether or not this semantic picture is fully coherent, Paseau neglects
the significant ontological piece of the problem. The original
motivation for reduction, even by Paseau’s lights, is “a gain in
ontological, ideological and axiomatic economy” (Paseau 39.) Because of
this, “what are numbers *really*” questions should not be brushed off as
attempts to push too hard on arbitrary labelings, as in the case of the
twins. A question like “is 2 *really* a member of 4?” is not akin to a
question like “does this person *really* have a seven-letter name?”

To see why, consider a situation in which two isolated communities make
differing semantic and linguistic choices. Community A accepts the von
Neumann reduction of arithmetic, doing so arbitrarily but in accordance
with the semantic picture laid out by Paseau, and also thinks that the
left twin is Olympia. Community B instead accepts the Zermelo reduction,
by an independent instance of Paseau’s process, and thinks that the left
twin is Theodora. They differ on the answers to questions like “Is 2 a
member of 4?” and “Does this girl have a seven-letter name?” We could
fix their semantic disputes by performing an overall reconciliation in
the vein of Paseau’s procedure, but in doing so should we worry that we
are herding everyone to the wrong answers to these questions? In the
case of the seven-letter name, we should only be worried if the name
takes ontological priority over the girl. Since we think of names purely
as a feature of our linguistic behavior, it does not matter much if we
do some violence to them. Our primary ontological commitment is to the
girl, and what we call her ultimately doesn’t matter. If, instead, we
held some sort of folkloric magical position in which there are “true
names” and the name is ontologically prior, we would not accept an
arbitrary semantic realignment; the answer to the question about the
length of her name would have real weight. In the case of arithmetic, we
are faced with the same choice. If we think that the reduction is a mere
labeling (as Paseau sometimes seems to) then indeed there is no harm
done by an arbitrary realignment, and questions about which numbers are
members of which others ultimately don’t matter. However, this attitude
only coheres with an ontological attitude that accepts *sui generis*
numbers. It only doesn’t matter which numbers are members of which
others if the reduction is merely a linguistic practice regarding the
true objects, numbers.

Of course, this arbitrary reduction does indeed show that the practice
of mathematics is not inherently committed to the existence of *sui
generis* numbers by providing a reinterpretation for that practice that
contains only sets. However, it does not defend *us* from that
commitment. In order to justify the choice of an arbitrary number-less
ontology, there must be a background assumption of *sui generis*
numbers, otherwise we would not be justified in nonchalance about
questions of number membership. The dilemma for Paseau, then, is clear.
If reduction is still supposed to be motivated by ontological economy,
then we cannot afford to be arbitrary in our choice.

Another way to see that the ontological problem remains for Paseau’s
semantics-first approach is by revisiting the epistemological framing.
Although we might be able to resolve the issue of semantic ambiguity
arbitrarily, we cannot do so for the epistemological issue. If the
numeral 3 really denotes some particular set by virtue of our arbitrary
semantic choice, how can we come to know that identification? It seems
absurd to say that we are gaining knowledge by means of our arbitrary
choice between reductions, but the only alternative is to contend that
knowledge is irrelevant here. Once again, the same dilemma arises. If we
are not gaining knowledge through our arbitrary choice, then the fact of
the matter is irrelevant. Paseau is not presenting a view on which there
are no *sui generis* numbers, just one in which we can consistently talk
as if there aren’t. This demonstrates that our linguistic practices
don’t precommit us to their existence, but it does nothing to provide
support for the idea that they don’t actually exist. Thus, the view does
not benefit from any ontological economy.

In sum, Paseau’s reply intentionally ignores the deeper ontological
questions that reduction raises in favor of focusing on semantics.
Paseau provides a pretense under which we can hide and pretend that
there are no *sui generis* numbers, but he provides no reason to think
that there actually are no such numbers. Our numbers might be sets, and
we can talk as if they are, but we are equally in the dark as to whether
they in fact are with or without Paseau’s account. Thus, Benacerraf’s
original objection retains its force. We can commit ourselves to a
particular reduction and play the game of pretending that it is the
right one, but we still have no reason to believe its ontological
underpinnings.

## Works Cited

Benacerraf, P. (1965). “What Numbers Could Not Be.” *Philosophical Review* 74(1): 47–73.

Paseau, A. (2009). “Reducing Arithmetic to Set Theory.” In *New Waves in Philosophy of Mathematics*, ed. O. Bueno and Ø. Linnebo, pp. 35–55.
